bpo-31582: Created a new section describing sys.path initialization (#31082)
python/cpython: Doc/using/cmdline.rst

element, subscript zero (``sys.argv[0]``), is a string reflecting the program's
source.

> .. _using-on-interface-option-c:

Reviewer: That's not needed, use:

```
:option:`-c <command> <-c>`
```

(I'm not sure if it works for -c because of its ``<command>`` argument, I never tried.)

Author: Thanks, I will try that.

Author: Works nicely, thank you for that!

   options).  See also :envvar:`PYTHONDEBUG`.

> .. _using-on-misc-option-uppercase-e:

Reviewer: Just use:

```
:option:`-E`
```

   Need Python configured with the :option:`--with-trace-refs` build option.

   .. versionadded:: 3.11

.. _using-on-finding-modules:

Finding modules
---------------

A module search path is initialized when Python starts. This module search path
may be accessed at :data:`sys.path`.

The first entry in the module search path is the directory that contains the
input script, if there is one. Otherwise, the first entry is the current
directory, which is the case when executing the interactive shell, a ``-c``
command, or ``-m`` module.

The :envvar:`PYTHONPATH` environment variable is often used to add directories
to the search path. If this environment variable is found then the contents are
added to the module search path.

The next items added are the directories containing standard Python modules as
well as any shared libraries (DLL/dylib/so) that these modules depend on. The
directory with the platform-independent Python modules is called ``prefix``.
The directory with the shared libraries is called ``exec_prefix``.

The :envvar:`PYTHONHOME` environment variable may be used to set the ``prefix``

> and ``exec_prefix`` locations. Otherwise these directories are found by using

Reviewer 2: Ill-advised setting of PYTHONPATH seems to be one of the big footshoots for novice users. Often there are recommendations to add setting PYTHONPATH in one's shell profile files or the like and then it is forgotten about until it comes back to haunt you when you upgrade to a new Python version or use a venv. I think we should emphasize somewhere in the section that: (1) the values of these variables apply to *all* versions of Python that you might be using and (2) that, in most cases, you should not need to set them.

Author: I agree, I have added a note to highlight this.

the Python executable as a starting point and then looking for various 'landmark'
files and directories. Note that any symbolic links are followed so the real

> Python executable location is used as the search starting point. On MacOS, the

Reviewer 2: MacOS -> macOS

Reviewer 2: But, come to think of it, `PYTHONEXECUTABLE` is a holdover from ancient days. It really should be deprecated and eventually removed.  I've opened [bpo-46901](https://bugs.python.org/issue46901) to do so. In any case, we should not encourage its use so let's remove this sentence.

Author: I have made the requested changes; please review again.

:envvar:`PYTHONEXECUTABLE` environment variable may be used to set the Python
executable location. The Python executable location is called ``home``.

Once ``home`` is determined, the ``prefix`` directory is found by first looking
for :file:`python{majorversion}{minorversion}.zip` (``python311.zip``). On Windows

> the zip archive is searched for in :file:`Lib` and on Unix the archive is expected

Reviewer 3: On Windows, the zip file landmark is looked for in the executable directory, if the executable directory is defined.

Reviewer 4: And the executable directory is always known on Windows, because we get it from the OS. It's only certain circumstances on Linux where we may not have it (specifically, if the name in `argv[0]` used to launch Python can't be found on `PATH`, which is very unusual and doesn't really need to be documented here)

Author: Thank you both, my mistake, I misread the ZIP_LANDMARK in getpath.py, there is indeed no platlibdir in the 'nt' section.

to be in :file:`lib`. Note that the expected zip archive location is added to the
module search path even if the archive does not exist. If no archive was found,
Python on Windows will continue the search for ``prefix`` by looking for :file:`Lib\\os.py`
or :file:`Lib\\os.pyc`. Python on Unix will look for :file:`lib/python{majorversion}.{minorversion}/os.py`

> (``lib/python3.11/os.py``) or :file:`lib/python{majorversion}.{minorversion}/os.pyc` (``lib/python3.11/os.pyc``).

Reviewer 2: Is that true? On Unix systems these days, the .pyc files are supposed to be in `lib/python3.n/__pycache__/` and have a version-specific and opt-level specific suffix. For example, on a current macOS framework install:

```
$ cd /Library/Frameworks/Python.framework/Versions/3.10/lib/python3.10
$ ls *.pyc
ls: *.pyc: No such file or directory
$ ls __pycache__/
__future__.cpython-310.opt-1.pyc                    nntplib.cpython-310.opt-1.pyc
__future__.cpython-310.pyc                          nntplib.cpython-310.pyc
__phello__.foo.cpython-310.opt-1.pyc                ntpath.cpython-310.opt-1.pyc
[...]
```

The old unqualified .pyc form of the file name in the lib directly may still be supported as a legacy but that should be the exception these days.

Author: Well spotted! I think you are correct, this should be updated in getpath.py I believe, @zooba what do you think?

At the moment line 170 in getpath.py has:
```
if os_name == 'posix' or os_name == 'darwin':
    BUILDDIR_TXT = 'pybuilddir.txt'
    BUILD_LANDMARK = 'Modules/Setup.local'
    DEFAULT_PROGRAM_NAME = f'python{VERSION_MAJOR}'
    STDLIB_SUBDIR = f'{platlibdir}/python{VERSION_MAJOR}.{VERSION_MINOR}'
    STDLIB_LANDMARKS = [f'{STDLIB_SUBDIR}/os.py', f'{STDLIB_SUBDIR}/os.pyc']
    PLATSTDLIB_LANDMARK = f'{platlibdir}/python{VERSION_MAJOR}.{VERSION_MINOR}/lib-dynload'
    BUILDSTDLIB_LANDMARKS = ['Lib/os.py']
    VENV_LANDMARK = 'pyvenv.cfg'
    ZIP_LANDMARK = f'{platlibdir}/python{VERSION_MAJOR}{VERSION_MINOR}.zip'
    DELIM = ':'
    SEP = '/'

elif os_name == 'nt':
    BUILDDIR_TXT = 'pybuilddir.txt'
    BUILD_LANDMARK = f'{VPATH}\\Modules\\Setup.local'
    DEFAULT_PROGRAM_NAME = f'python'
    STDLIB_SUBDIR = 'Lib'
    STDLIB_LANDMARKS = [f'{STDLIB_SUBDIR}\\os.py', f'{STDLIB_SUBDIR}\\os.pyc']
    PLATSTDLIB_LANDMARK = f'{platlibdir}'
    BUILDSTDLIB_LANDMARKS = ['Lib\\os.py']
    VENV_LANDMARK = 'pyvenv.cfg'
    ZIP_LANDMARK = f'python{VERSION_MAJOR}{VERSION_MINOR}{PYDEBUGEXT or ""}.zip'
    WINREG_KEY = f'SOFTWARE\\Python\\PythonCore\\{PYWINVER}\\PythonPath'
    DELIM = ';'
    SEP = '\\'

```
Both the Windows and Unix os.pyc STDLIB_LANDMARKS should be updated/removed.

Author: Created https://bugs.python.org/issue46909 for this

Reviewer 3: Looking for `f'{STDLIB_SUBDIR}\\os.pyc'` is even more historical now. Unless the standard library is manually precompiled, which is optional when installing, Python 3.11 won't have an "os[.\*].pyc" file in any directory. The `os` module is frozen in 3.11, so there's no reason to distribute or cache it as a PYC file.

Author: @zooba closed https://bugs.python.org/issue46909 as the searching for .pyc is used. Probably best to leave it out of the the documentation though.

Reviewer 4: > The os module is frozen in 3.11, so there's no reason to distribute or cache it as a PYC file.

This is a good point, we probably need to pick a different landmark (perhaps `site.py`?).

I do think detecting the precompiled PYC is correct here. Precompiling on install generates the `__pycache__` directories, but precompiling manually for an embedded runtime is totally legitimate (though I believe more performant if you also zip up the .pycs and put the ZIP file somewhere discoverable, which is why the ZIP detection overrides these landmarks).

Reviewer 3: > This is a good point, we probably need to pick a different landmark (perhaps `site.py`?).

site.py is also frozen. See [Tools/scripts/freeze_modules.py](https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/v3.11.0a6/Tools/scripts/freeze_modules.py#L35-L84). Maybe add an empty landmark file that includes the Python version in its name, e.g. `__py_stdlib_cpython_3_11`.

Author: > 

Steve, to be clear, do you think the docs should mention searching for os.pyc or not?

Once found, ``prefix`` and ``exec_prefix`` may be accessed at :data:`sys.prefix`
and :data:`sys.exec_prefix`.

Finally, the :mod:`site` module is processed and :file:`site-packages` directories
are added to the module search path. A common way to customize the search path is
to create :mod:`sitecustomize` or :mod:`usercustomize` modules as described in
the :mod:`site` module documentation.

.. note::

   The effect of :mod:`site` on the module search path may be seen by running
   Python with ``-S`` which will start Python without importing site.

Virtual environments
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If Python is run in a virtual environment (as described at :ref:`tut-venv`)
then ``prefix`` and ``exec_prefix`` are specific to the virtual environment.

If a ``pyvenv.cfg`` file is found alongside the main executable, or in the
directory one level above the executable, the following variations apply:

* If ``home`` is an absolute path and :envvar:`PYTHONHOME` is not set, this
  path is used instead of the path to the main executable when deducing ``prefix``
  and ``exec_prefix``.

_pth files
~~~~~~~~~~

To completely override :data:`sys.path`, create a ``._pth`` file with the same

> name as the DLL/dylib (``python311._pth``) or the executable (``python._pth``)

Reviewer 2: .dylib is Apple (macOS/iOS) specific, .so is the extension used on most other Unix-systems. Perhaps we should just use the generic-term `extension module` throughout this section and explain once about the various platform-specific terms .so., DLL, and .dylib. Many users will have no idea what these other prefixes mean on their platforms.

Author: Thank you, I have amended as suggested.

   Need Python configured with the :option:`--with-trace-refs` build option.

   .. versionadded:: 3.11

.. _using-on-finding-modules:

Finding modules
---------------

A module search path is initialized when Python starts. This module search path
may be accessed at :data:`sys.path`.

The first entry in the module search path is the directory that contains the
input script, if there is one. Otherwise, the first entry is the current
directory, which is the case when executing the interactive shell, a ``-c``
command, or ``-m`` module.

The :envvar:`PYTHONPATH` environment variable is often used to add directories
to the search path. If this environment variable is found then the contents are
added to the module search path.

.. note::

   :envvar:`PYTHONPATH` will affect all installed Python versions/environments.
   Be wary of setting this in your shell profile or global environment variables.
   The :mod:`site` module offers more nuanced techniques as mentioned below.

The next items added are the directories containing standard Python modules as
well as any :term:`extension module`\s that these modules depend on. Extension

> modules are .dll files on Windows, .dylib files on macOS and .so files on Linux.

Reviewer 2: Sorry, I may have mislead you here.  Extension modules have a `.so` extension on macOS as well as on Linux and on other Unix-y systems - all other ones AFAIK (like the BSD's). What is true is that shared libraries on macOS typically have a `.dylib` extension but Python extension modules on macOS aren't shared libraries. (A package installed (via pip, say) that includes an extension module might also install a shared library but I think that level of detail isn't needed here.) So perhaps this should be reworded to be `.dll files on Windows, .so files on other platforms`. ?

Reviewer 3: Extension modules are ".pyd" files in Windows, which in CPython are DLL files (`IMAGE_FILE_DLL` to be specific in terms of the PE `IMAGE_FILE_HEADER.Characteristics`). The ".pyd" file extension is used in Windows in order to associate a Python icon with the file, as defined by the "Python.Extension" progid.

Author: No problem @ned-deily. Thanks @eryksun , I never knew why Windows used .pyd, always seemed curious to me that Python had these renamed .dll files!

.. note::

   The effect of :mod:`site` on the module search path may be seen by running
   Python with ``-S`` which will start Python without importing site. ``-s`` will
   skip adding the :data:`user site-packages directory <site.USER_SITE>` to :data:`sys.path`.

   The effect of :envvar:`PYTHON*` environment variables may be seen by running
   Python with ``-E`` which will start Python ignoring these environment variables.

   Finally, ``-I`` will start Python in isolated mode, simlar to ``-E`` and ``-s``
   but with further restrictions.

Virtual environments
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If Python is run in a virtual environment (as described at :ref:`tut-venv`)
then ``prefix`` and ``exec_prefix`` are specific to the virtual environment.

If a ``pyvenv.cfg`` file is found alongside the main executable, or in the
directory one level above the executable, the following variations apply:

* If ``home`` is an absolute path and :envvar:`PYTHONHOME` is not set, this
  path is used instead of the path to the main executable when deducing ``prefix``
  and ``exec_prefix``.

_pth files
~~~~~~~~~~

To completely override :data:`sys.path`, create a ``._pth`` file with the same

> name as the extension module (``python311._pth``) or the executable (``python._pth``)

Reviewer 2: I think there is some confusion here: I believe the `python311` here is referring to the Python interpreter shared library (a DLL), not an extension module (confusingly also a DLL). @zooba, can you confirm and perhaps suggest a more correct wording?

Reviewer 2: Also, it this a Windows only feature? If not, the wording needs to take into account the fact that on Unix-y systems the python executable might have a shared library component.

Reviewer 3: It should be the same name as and located beside the Python executable or shared library (not "extension module") -- e.g. "python.exe" -> "python._pth" or "python311.dll" -> "python311._pth". 

Support for "._pth" files was extended to all platforms. I've tested this in Linux for a "._pth" file that's based on the real executable name, as well as a symlink to the executable, as well as a symlink to the "._pth" file. All work, but note that relative paths are resolved against the opened location of the "._pth" file. The real path of the "._pth" file is not used. I haven't checked how a "._pth" file works when named for a shared library, if the interpreter is built as such. Apparently this configuration [isn't tested](https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/v3.11.0a6/Lib/test/test_site.py#L562) in POSIX.

Author: Thank you, I have been mixing my shared library and extension module terms far too freely. Will review.

   Need Python configured with the :option:`--with-trace-refs` build option.

   .. versionadded:: 3.11

.. _using-on-finding-modules:

Finding modules
---------------

A module search path is initialized when Python starts. This module search path
may be accessed at :data:`sys.path`.

> The first entry in the module search path is the directory containing the input
> script (or the the current directory when no file is specified).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The first entry in the module search path is the directory that contains the
input script, if there is one. Otherwise, the first entry is the current
directory, which is the case when executing the REPL shell, a ``-c`` command,
or ``-m`` module.
```

Reviewer 4: I'd change "REPL shell" to "interactive shell", but otherwise, good catch.

Author: Amended, thank you

On Windows a default Python installation adds the :file:`/Lib` directory and
the :file:`/Lib/site-packages` directory to the module search path. These

> locations are relative to the :file:`python.exe` location. Standard modules

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure if it's helpful or not, but technically the above paths are relative to `prefix` just like on POSIX, where `prefix` is the directory containing `python.exe` (or in a venv, the directory containing the `Scripts` directory which contains `python.exe`).

If we define `prefix` and `exec_prefix` first and describe how each platform finds them (including the `PYTHONHOME` override), maybe it's easier to follow the rest in terms of those values?

Unfortunately, I don't think anyone knows the real difference between `prefix` and `exec_prefix` - maybe this discussion can help flush them out :)

Author: I'm not sure either. My aim was to make the new section as brief as possible. A simple overview with pointers to common ways sys.path initialization can be customised. So I don't want the new section to read like a reference document. Introducing `prefix` and `exec_prefix` when describing Windows is confusing, I have a Windows background and had never heard of `prefix `and `exec_prefix `before working on these doc changes. I think the best approach is an overview in the new section with links to detailed notes per platform? Your Windows notes are great, the Unix notes seem less comprehensive and the Mac notes are lacking.

Author: I'm working on some improvements. After giving my changes a fresh read today and rereading the comments to date I can see improvements are needed.

Reviewer 4: You've made the biggest start anyone has ever attempted though! Was always going to take a few passes to get it sounding good.

Reviewer 4: > I have a Windows background and had never heard of prefix and exec_prefix before working on these doc changes.

I believe it, but `sys.prefix` and `sys.exec_prefix` are both set and are both useful on Windows (arguably moreso than on other OSs), so introducing them doesn't hurt I don't think.

Combining the stuff that's common into one place and then calling out for platform-specific oddities (which over time should be fixed and then won't have to be documented anymore) is the way I'd like to see this go. But as you say, the challenge is avoiding having it sound like a reference doc!

are usually found in the Lib directory and third-party modules in the
Lib/site-packages directory.

On Unix the lib and lib/site-packages directories are added by looking for

> :file:`/exec_prefix/lib/pythonversion` , :file:`/exec_prefix/lib/pythonversion/site-packages` ,

Reviewer 4: I feel like we're missing some kind of substitution character here? Something like `/{exec_prefix}/lib/python{version}`

> :file:`/prefix/lib/pythonversion` and :file:`/prefix/lib/pythonversion/site-packages` .

Reviewer 3: In Linux, when Python 3.11 is built with separate locations for `--prefix` and `--exec-prefix`, I have the following entries in `sys.path` when running with `-S` (i.e. the site module is not imported):

```none
{script directory} or " "
{prefix}/lib/python311.zip
{prefix}/lib/python3.11
{exec_prefix}/lib/python3.11/lib-dynload
```

AFAIK, `"{exec_prefix}/lib/python3.11"` is never added to `sys.path`. Extension modules in the standard library are installed in "lib-dynload". The "python{X}{Y}.zip" file path for the zipped standard library is added whether or not it exists. 

Without `-S` (i.e. the site module is imported), the following site packages directories are added, if they exist:

```none
{userbase}/lib/python3.11/site-packages
{prefix}/lib/python3.11/site-packages
{exec_prefix}/lib/python3.11/site-packages
```

In POSIX, the default user base directory is `os.path.expanduser("~/.local")` -- except on macOS framework builds.

Author: Thank you for the detailed comments. I've edited the docs. I feel the details should be in the ```Using Python on Unix platforms``` area similar to the detailed Windows notes, so I'm trying to keep this initial overview as simple as possible which does bring the risk of not being completely comprehensive and accurate.

Often ``exec_prefix`` and ``prefix`` are the same and a common result is
adding :file:`/usr/lib/pythonversion` and :file:`/usr/lib/pythonversion/site-packages`
to the module search path. See :ref:`using-on-unix` for details.

The :envvar:`PYTHONPATH` environment variable is often used to add directories
to the search path.

Another common way to set the search path is to create :mod:`sitecustomize`
or :mod:`usercustomize` modules as described in the :mod:`site` module
documentation.

Virtual environments
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If Python is run in a virtual environment (as described at :ref:`tut-venv`)
the Lib and Lib/site-packages directories are specific to the virtual
environment.

If a ``pyvenv.cfg`` file is found alongside the main executable, or in the
directory one level above the executable, the following variations apply:

* If ``home`` is an absolute path and :envvar:`PYTHONHOME` is not set, this
  path is used instead of the path to the main executable when deducing the
  Lib and Lib/site-packages directory locations.

_pth files
~~~~~~~~~~

To completely override :data:`sys.path`, create a ``._pth`` file with the same

> name as the DLL/dylib/so (``python311._pth``) or the executable (``python._pth``)

Reviewer 4: > same name as the DLL/dylib/so

Currently only the DLL/dylib work - for POSIX we don't have an (obvious) way to get the real `.so`, and generally there isn't one (see `library_to_dict` in getpath.c). We could probably get the name of it at compile time, but so many builds deliberately move thing around afterwards that it wouldn't be trustworthy for this feature.

Author: Thank you, I know Windows very well but my POSIX knowledge is dismal.

Reviewer 4: It's not obvious without walking through the source code anyway. Hence, we need this doc :)

Finding modules
---------------

A module search path is initialized when Python starts. This module search path
may be accessed at :data:`sys.path`.

The first entry in the module search path is the directory that contains the
input script, if there is one. Otherwise, the first entry is the current
directory, which is the case when executing the interactive shell, a ``-c``
command, or ``-m`` module.

On Windows a default Python installation adds the :file:`/Lib` directory and
the :file:`/Lib/site-packages` directory to the module search path. These
locations are relative to the :file:`python.exe` location. Standard modules
are usually found in the Lib directory and third-party modules in the
Lib/site-packages directory.

On Unix the lib and lib/site-packages directories are added by looking for
:file:`/{exec_prefix}/lib/pythonversion/site-packages` , :file:`/{exec_prefix}/lib/pythonversion/lib-dynload` ,
:file:`/{prefix}/lib/pythonversion` and :file:`/{prefix}/lib/pythonversion/site-packages` .
Often ``exec_prefix`` and ``prefix`` are the same and a common result is
adding :file:`/usr/lib/pythonversion` and :file:`/usr/lib/pythonversion/site-packages`

> to the module search path. See :ref:`using-on-unix` for details.

Reviewer 3: The "{prefix}" and "{exec_prefix}" values from `sys.prefix` and `sys.exec_prefix` should be absolute paths, so the leading "/" shouldn't be there.

For the standard library it's actually "{base_prefix}" and "{base_exec_prefix}". For site packages it's "{prefix}" and "{exec_prefix}", which get overridden by a virtual environment.

Reviewer 4: And just to be clear, `getpath.py` does basically nothing for virtual environments apart from using the config to locate the base environment. It's `site.py` that does the actual search paths there.

Reviewer 3: I was thinking, since virtual environments are important, that the description should be consistent with running in one. So use `base_prefix` and `base_exec_prefix` for the location of the standard library and system site packages. Without a virtual environment, they should be the same as `prefix` and `exec_prefix`.

The basic description doesn't need to distinguish how and where the search path gets defined, but maybe it's clearer to state that it applies to running without `-S`.

   Need Python configured with the :option:`--with-trace-refs` build option.

   .. versionadded:: 3.11

> .. _using-on-finding-modules:

Reviewer: importlib finds module. This section is only about sys.path **initialization**: it can be modified afterwards by modifying directly sys.path list. I suggest to rename the link to "sys-path-init".

Author: Fair comment, I have amended.

Finding modules

> ---------------

Reviewer: What do you think of adding a new file to the doc? This section doesn't directly belong to the "Command line and environment". I suggest adding the new file to the Doc/library/ directory.

Example: ``Doc/library/sys_path_init.rst``.

IMO listing this file in https://docs.python.org/dev/library/modules.html is a good place.

Author: You are right, this section doesn't fit neatly into the "Command line and environment" page. I'm open to the idea of a new page. Be interested to know what @zooba  and @ned-deily think?

Author: I have moved the section into a new doc. Lets see what people think of this approach.

A module search path is initialized when Python starts. This module search path

> may be accessed at :data:`sys.path`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is accessed at :data:`sys.path`.
```

Author: `may be accessed` is correct IMO. The data is available at sys.path, but you don't have to go and view it, that is what I was getting at with `may be accessed`. The other correct alternative is `is available at sys.path`

The first entry in the module search path is the directory that contains the
input script, if there is one. Otherwise, the first entry is the current
directory, which is the case when executing the interactive shell, a :ref:`-c <using-on-interface-option-c>`

> command, or :ref:`-m <using-on-interface-option-m>` module.

Reviewer: Not in isolated mode. See the start of my PR adding -P option: https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/31542/files

```

   .. c:member:: int add_path0
      If non-zero, ``Py_RunMain()`` adds ``sys.path[0]``, it prepends the
      following directory to ``sys.path``:
      * The current working directory if :c:member:`argv[0] <PyConfig.argv>`
        is equal to ``L"-m"``(``python -m module``).
      * An empty string if :c:member:`argv[0] <PyConfig.argv>` is equal to
        ``L"-c"`` (``python -c code``).
      * :c:member:`argv[0] <PyConfig.argv>` otherwise (``python script.py``).
        Resolve symbolic links in this case.
      Set to 0 by the :option:`-P` command line option.
      Default: ``1`` in Python config, ``0`` in isolated config.
      .. versionadded:: 3.11
```

The :envvar:`PYTHONPATH` environment variable is often used to add directories
to the search path. If this environment variable is found then the contents are
added to the module search path.

.. note::

   :envvar:`PYTHONPATH` will affect all installed Python versions/environments.
   Be wary of setting this in your shell profile or global environment variables.
   The :mod:`site` module offers more nuanced techniques as mentioned below.

The next items added are the directories containing standard Python modules as
well as any :term:`extension module`\s that these modules depend on. Extension

> modules are .pyd files on Windows and .so files on other platforms. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
modules are ``.pyd`` files on Windows and ``.so`` files on other platforms. The
```

and ``exec_prefix`` locations. Otherwise these directories are found by using
the Python executable as a starting point and then looking for various 'landmark'
files and directories. Note that any symbolic links are followed so the real
Python executable location is used as the search starting point. The Python
executable location is called ``home``.

Once ``home`` is determined, the ``prefix`` directory is found by first looking
for :file:`python{majorversion}{minorversion}.zip` (``python311.zip``). On Windows
the zip archive is searched for in ``home`` and on Unix the archive is expected
to be in :file:`lib`. Note that the expected zip archive location is added to the
module search path even if the archive does not exist. If no archive was found,
Python on Windows will continue the search for ``prefix`` by looking for :file:`Lib\\os.py`.
Python on Unix will look for :file:`lib/python{majorversion}.{minorversion}/os.py`
(``lib/python3.11/os.py``). On Windows ``prefix`` and ``exec_prefix`` are the same,
however on other platforms :file:`lib/python{majorversion}.{minorversion}/lib-dynload`
(``lib/python3.11/lib-dynload``) is searched for and used as an anchor for

> ``exec_prefix``.

Reviewer: You should document sys.platlibdir and PYTHONPLATLIBDIR env var somewhere. 

See: https://docs.python.org/dev/library/sys.html#sys.platlibdir

Author: Thanks, I have now mentioned them.

Once found, ``prefix`` and ``exec_prefix`` may be accessed at :data:`sys.prefix`
and :data:`sys.exec_prefix`.

Finally, the :mod:`site` module is processed and :file:`site-packages` directories
are added to the module search path. A common way to customize the search path is
to create :mod:`sitecustomize` or :mod:`usercustomize` modules as described in
the :mod:`site` module documentation.

> .. note::
> 
>    Certain command line options may further affect path calculations.
>    See :ref:`-E <using-on-misc-option-uppercase-e>`, :ref:`-I <using-on-misc-option-uppercase-i>`, :ref:`-s <using-on-misc-option-s>` and :ref:`-S <using-on-misc-option-uppercase-s>` for further details.

Reviewer: In terms of formatting, I suggest a list instead:

```suggestion
Certain command line options may further affect path calculations:

* :ref:`-E <using-on-misc-option-uppercase-e>`: ignore environment variables
* :ref:`-I <using-on-misc-option-uppercase-i>`: isolated mode
* :ref:`-s <using-on-misc-option-s>`: don't add user directory
* :ref:`-S <using-on-misc-option-uppercase-s>`: don't import the :mod:`site` module
```

It would be nice to have at one place, the exhaustive list of things impacting sys.path:

* current working directory
* path of the Python executable program
* list of cmdline options
* list of env vars
* list of config files: see my list at https://docs.python.org/dev/c-api/init_config.html#python-path-configuration

Author: I had a more verbose description, see https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/31082/commits/59cbc07c783610c8f9204b8a5fed4881f3995a82#r822648316 however @zooba preferred the more succint approach.

Virtual environments
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If Python is run in a virtual environment (as described at :ref:`tut-venv`)
then ``prefix`` and ``exec_prefix`` are specific to the virtual environment.

If a ``pyvenv.cfg`` file is found alongside the main executable, or in the
directory one level above the executable, the following variations apply:

* If ``home`` is an absolute path and :envvar:`PYTHONHOME` is not set, this
  path is used instead of the path to the main executable when deducing ``prefix``
  and ``exec_prefix``.

_pth files
~~~~~~~~~~

To completely override :data:`sys.path`, create a ``._pth`` file with the same

> name as the shared library (``python311._pth``) or the executable (``python._pth``)

Reviewer 3: I checked the shared-library case in Linux. It appears to not be supported at all. This may be the case on all POSIX platforms, including macOS. This description should emphasize that the shared library is used only if its path is known. It's always known in Windows.

Reviewer 3: ISTM that the path of the shared library in POSIX could be known in many if not most cases, since most Unix platforms support the non-standard `dladdr()` function. For example, call `dladdr(PyObject_Call, &info)`, which returns the object path in `info.dli_fname`. If the interpreter is known to have been built as a shared library, then `dli_fname` is either the absolute path of the library or relative to the current working directory at startup. 

I wouldn't trust the result if Python is linked statically in the application, because the path comes from the command line (at least in Linux), which isn't necessarily related to the file that was actually executed. Then again, the code that sets `sys.executable` doesn't seem to care about this in POSIX. For example, run Python with the command line "./spam", where "./spam" does not exist, but actually execute the real Python binary. Then `sys.executable` will be the non-existent path "./spam", and "./spam._pth" will be used if it exists.

Reviewer 3: A bit of the latter has leaked into Windows Python in 3.11. An existing file or directory from the command line will be used as `sys.executable`, but only if the path from the command line uses backslashes instead of forward slashes. 

For example, spawn Python by calling `CreateProcessW()` with `lpCommandLine` set to `"C:\\Windows"` and `lpApplicationName` set to the real executable path. Then `sys.executable` will be `"C:\\Windows"` (a directory), and `"C:\\Windows._pth"` will used if it exists. But change the command line to `"C:/Windows"`, and `sys.executable` will be the path of the executed file.

From behavior in prior versions, I expect `sys.executable` in Windows (or `sys._base_executable` in the venv case) to always be the path of the process image, i.e. `lpApplicationName` from the `CreateProcessW()` call, never the `argv[0]` file/directory from the command line.

Author: > I checked the shared-library case in Linux. It appears to not be supported at all. This may be the case on all POSIX platforms, including macOS. This description should emphasize that the shared library is used only if its path is known. It's always known in Windows.

Thanks for checking this.

Reviewer 4: @eryksun That last change you mention is deliberate, as it's actually essential to fix some symlink handling. It does open some interesting exploitability, however, using the `._pth` next to `library` is always recommended if you're worried about someone hijacking it.

Reviewer 3: @zooba, if it's intentional, maybe it should support forward slash for the leaf component, e.g. `r"C:/Windows\py.exe"` works, but passing `r"C:/Windows/py.exe"` as `argv[0]` falls back on using the real process image path for `sys.executable`. Though I don't follow the necessity due to symlinks. The Windows loader never resolves symlinks for `GetModuleFileNameW()`.

Reviewer 4: Probably right about the forward slash, I haven't looked back at why it's acting like that.

Possibly the symlink issue I'm thinking of is Explorer? I dug into it a while back, but I think ShellExecute resolves the symlink before launching, but passes the original path through argv?

Reviewer 3: > Possibly the symlink issue I'm thinking of is Explorer?

Ah, the shell API. It's always the shell API...

and specify one line for each path to add to :data:`sys.path`. The file based on
the shared library name overrides the one based on the executable, which allows
paths to be restricted for any program loading the runtime if desired.

When the file exists, all registry and environment variables are ignored,
isolated mode is enabled, and :mod:`site` is not imported unless one line in the
file specifies ``import site``. Blank paths and lines starting with ``#`` are
ignored. Each path may be absolute or relative to the location of the file.
Import statements other than to ``site`` are not permitted, and arbitrary code
cannot be specified.

Note that ``.pth`` files (without leading underscore) will be processed normally
by the :mod:`site` module when ``import site`` has been specified.

Embedded Python
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> If Python is embedded within another application :c:func:`Py_SetPath` can be used to

Reviewer: Py_SetPath is deprecated. I suggest to document the PyConfig API first.

There is also Py_SetPathEx.

Author: Ok, will do

.. note::

   The effect of :mod:`site` on the module search path may be seen by running
   Python with ``-S`` which will start Python without importing site. ``-s`` will
   skip adding the :data:`user site-packages directory <site.USER_SITE>` to :data:`sys.path`.

   The effect of :envvar:`PYTHON*` environment variables may be seen by running
   Python with ``-E`` which will start Python ignoring these environment variables.

   Finally, ``-I`` will start Python in isolated mode, simlar to ``-E`` and ``-s``

>    but with further restrictions.

Reviewer 4: This whole note feels a bit backwards - useful tips for someone trying to diagnose an issue, but not really documentation.

Maybe frame it as "Certain command line options may further affect path calculations. See `-E`, `-I`, `-S` and `-s` for further details." (and make each option a link to its docs, further up on this page).

Author: Ok, done.
